Python for Physicists - Lausanne, Fall 2013
===========================================

:Author: Valentin Haenel <valentin@haenel.co>
:Date: 2013-08-07
:Revision: v1.0
:Course Date: Sept - Dec 2013
:Link: TBA

Abstract
--------

Software, programs and scripts have become an indispensable tool for the modern
scientist -- for example to simulate physical systems, solve equations or to
create publication ready figures. While many best practices and libraries for
development of such «scientific» software have emerged, such topics are often
not (yet) taught as part of the scientists curriculum. As a result, many
scientists waste time writing deficient code and often reinvent the wheel. The
intention of this course is to help to remedy this situation by making young
students aware of available tools and techniques.

The language of choice is Python, a modern, open-source, dynamically typed
programming language. It is equipped with powerful third-party modules targeted
specifically at the programming scientist -- such as a fast array container
(numpy), high-level scientific algorithms (scipy) and sophisticated plotting
routines (matplotlib). Python has emerged as somewhat of a de-facto standard
in many scientific communities since it is both easy-to-learn and yet provides
enough flexibility to write and maintain large programs effectively.

During the course I will present a wide range of topics including: best
practices for software engineering, software carpentry, using version control
effectively, an introduction to Python, and a broad overview of the Python
scientific ecosystem and the most common tools. The course will feature
lectures and hand-on sessions, giving you a change to try out the materials.
Additionally, there will be a longer group-oriented programming project.

You do not need to be familiar with Python, but in can be helpful to have a
basic understanding of programming constructs such as variables, loops,
control-flow and functions.

About the Lecturer
------------------

Valentin Haenel is an freelance software developer with much experience working
in a scientific context. He is the co-author of a scientific toolbox used in
experimental psychology research and has published a book about using Git for
version control. Furthermore, he is a frequent contributor to various
open-source projects, speaks regularly at various scientific Python events in
Europe and has organized and coordinated the tutorials tracks at the European
scientific Python conference (EuroSciPy) in the past. He holds a degree in
computer science from the University of Edinburgh and a degree in computational
neuroscience from the Bernstein Center in Berlin.

See also: http://haenel.co
